eprints@whiterose.ac.uk https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk Universities of Leeds, Sheield and York Deposited via The University of Sheffield. White Rose Research Online URL for this paper: https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/id/eprint/95645/ Version: Accepted Version Article: Webb, D. (2013) Critical pedagogy, utopia and political (dis)engagement. Power and Education, 5 (3). pp. 280-290. https://doi.org/10.2304/power.2013.5.3.280 Reuse Items deposited in White Rose Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws. The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of the full text version. This is indicated by the licence information on the White Rose Research Online record for the item. Takedown If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request.
Power and Education Volume 5 Number 3 2013 www.wwwords.co.uk/POWER 1 Critical Pedagogy, Utopia 2 and Political (Dis)engagement 3 DARREN WEBB 4 School of Education, 5 University of Sheffield, United Kingdom 6 ABSTRACT This article offers a critique of contemporary utopian pedagogy, focusing in particular on 7 the concept of utopia underpinning it. Utopian pedagogy presents itself as a hope-driven practice of 8 political engagement, grounded in the everyday, but animated by a utopian longing for something 9 more and something better. What this article argues, however, is that the way in which utopia is 10 conceptualised within utopian pedagogy places limits on its capacity for political intervention. Taking 11 as an analytical frame the distinction between ‘utopia-as-process’ and ‘utopia-as-system’, the article 12 highlights, firstly, the way in which critical pedagogy now accepts, almost without reservation, the 13 standard liberal rejection of utopia-as-system, and, secondly, the rather emaciated practice of politics 14 that follows if one restricts one’s understanding of utopia to an open-ended process of becoming. The 15 article concludes by arguing that effective political engagement requires radical educators to abandon 16 an uncritical adherence to liberal sensibilities and embrace both utopia-as-process and utopia-as-system. 17 Introduction 18 This article offers a critique of contemporary utopian pedagogy, focusing in particular on the 19 concept of utopia underpinning it. The term itself was coined by Paulo Freire, although it is only 20 relatively recently that ‘utopian pedagogy’ has caught on as a phrase signifying a shift within the 21 field of radical education (Coté et al, 2007). The foregrounding of the ‘utopian’ provides a 22 corrective to the anti-utopian thrust of critical pedagogy as it emerged in the 1970s and 1980s, with 23 its emphasis on the school as a site of economic and cultural reproduction. Critics argue that social 24 reproduction theory peddled a politics of despair that precluded any positive engagement with the 25 education process (Carlson, 1996). Utopian pedagogy, on the other hand, seeks to develop not only 26 a language of critique, but also a language of possibility. 27 Resistance to the operation of power is what animates utopian pedagogy. Stressing that 28 ‘domination is always partial’ (Giroux, 1992, p. 218 NOT IN REFERENCES. PLEASE SUPPLY 29 DETAILS), utopian pedagogy searches for ‘breathing spaces in the system’ (Zaslove, 2007, p. 98), 30 openings through which new counter-hegemonic possibilities can emerge (Greene, 2003). The 31 basic argument of this article is that it fails in its task. The article begins by outlining two concepts 32 of utopia, ‘utopia-as-process’ and ‘utopia-as-system’, and highlights the way in which critical 33 pedagogy has come to accept, almost without reservation, the standard liberal rejection of the 34 latter. Focusing specifically on the work of Henry Giroux, the article then analyses utopian 35 pedagogy as he and others understand it and draw attention to the rather emaciated practice of 36 politics that follows if one restricts one’s understanding of utopia to an open-ended process of 37 becoming. 38 The article argues that the binary distinction between utopia-as-process and utopia-as-system 39 is a false one. The idea that utopia-as-process can be separated from utopia-as-system – and that the 40 radical theorist, activist or educator can (and should) opt for one without the other – took hold in 280 http://dx.doi.org/10.2304/power.2013.5.3.280
Critical Pedagogy, Utopia and Political (Dis)Engagement 41 the wake of the fall of actually existing socialism and reflected the weakness of the challenge 42 mounted by the Left to the equation ‘Socialism = Stalinism = Utopia’ (Elliott, 1993). The binary 43 distinction is still peddled today and is politically immobilising. Drawing variously on the work of 44 Paulo Freire, Raymond Williams, William Morris and Karl Mannheim, this article offers a defence 45 of utopia-as-system and argues that fears of totalising closure and the indignity of speaking for 46 others are misplaced. The conclusion suggests that if resistance to the operation of power is really 47 what animates utopian pedagogy, then this requires educationalists to abandon an uncritical 48 adherence to liberal sensibilities and embrace both utopia-as-process and utopia-as-system. 49 Two Concepts of Utopia 50 Identifying the boundaries of the utopian is fraught with difficulty, and numerous attempts have 51 been made to define ‘utopia’ (see Sargent, 1975, 1994, 2010). Utopian studies as a field is, indeed, in 52 large part constituted by attempts to delimit its own object of inquiry. It is possible nonetheless to 53 differentiate between two dominant concepts of utopia. These concepts go by various names. 54 Jacoby (2005) terms them ‘blueprint’ and ‘iconoclastic’ utopianism; McKenna (2001) distinguishes 55 between the ‘end-state model’ of utopia and the ‘process model’; and McLaren and Tadeu da Silva 56 (1993) talk of ‘categorical’ and ‘provisional’ utopian thinking. Following Levitas (2007), I shall refer 57 to the two dominant concepts of utopia as ‘utopia-as-system’ and ‘utopia-as-process’. 58 Utopia-as-system is: 59 ¥ Representational: an alternative state or society is depicted in detail and given representational 60 form and content; a vision of a better world is represented in words, sounds and images. Utopia 61 is not a fuzzy, hazy kind of a concept – it is a detailed talking picture. 62 ¥ Totalistic: the representation of a better world, of a better way of being, is not partial or 63 fragmented. Utopia-as-system presents a holistic vision of an entire functioning imaginary 64 society and depicts how and in what ways the various institutions, processes and practices are 65 related and interrelated. 66 ¥ Normative: utopia-as-system’ is not scared of making strong normative judgements. The 67 imaginary state or society that is represented holistically in a totalising vision is not just different 68 to society as it is presently structured – it is better. 69 ¥ Prescriptive: the better society depicted in all its totalising glory is presented as something that 70 we should be striving to realise. It is something we need, something we should have. Utopia-as- 71 system is utopia as prescription. 72 ¥ Instrumental: the utopian system represented in words, images and sounds is itself an 73 instrument in its own material realisation. The vision of a better world functions as a goal to 74 inspire and mobilise transformative political action. 75 Utopia-as-process is: 76 ¥ Open-ended: utopia is conceptualised as an open-ended process of becoming rather than a 77 static representation of a single state of affairs. Utopia is best seen as a force, an impulse or an 78 inchoate yearning rather than a detailed picture. 79 ¥ Fluid and partial: as an open-ended process, the shape of utopia is shifting and elusive. Utopia 80 resists totalising closure and is always open, provisional and undecidable. Occasionally in life, 81 one catches glimpses of utopia – fleeting, tantalising foretastes of a new way of being – but 82 nothing like a totalising vision is possible. The most we can say, paraphrasing Ernst Bloch (1986), 83 is that utopia is on the tip of our tongue even if we do not know what it tastes like. 84 ¥ Exploratory: utopia conceived as a process of becoming can also be conceived as a process of 85 exploration, a process of exploring new possibilities. There is no blueprint to serve as a guide 86 here – utopia is an ongoing, heuristic process of exploratory encounters conducted in a spirit of 87 indeterminacy and uncertainty. 88 ¥ Playful: utopia-as-process does not reject the utopian imagination, but to the extent that the 89 utopian conjures images and explores the possibility of new possibilities, these are playful 90 expressions of desire rather than strong normative pronouncements. 91 ¥ Critical: although utopia is conceived as a process hedged everywhere with uncertainty, 92 provisionality and undecidability, this does not mean that it lacks a political function. The 93 function of utopia, however, is not to mobilise transformative action in the name of an 281
Darren Webb 94 inspirational vision or goal. The key function of utopia becomes critical demystification – 95 uncovering, unveiling, unmasking the operation of power so that new open, partial, fluid, spaces 96 of possibility can emerge. The playful expressions of desire, the tentative explorations of new 97 possibilities, engender something that is variously termed cognitive estrangement, fruitful 98 bewilderment or defamiliarisation (Roemer, 2003, pp. 63-64). ARE BULLET POINTS OK 99 HERE, OR IS THIS A COMPLETE QUOTATION THAT SHOULD BE INDENTED? 100 Utopia-as-system has been the subject of long-standing critique. This has traditionally been the 101 concern of liberals, and found its strongest expression in the works of Karl Popper and Isaiah Berlin. 102 Each offered extensive critiques of the theory and practice of utopia, which they considered 103 inimical to human plurality, difference and freedom. For Berlin and Popper, the ‘utopian engineer’ 104 constructs a vision of a better world, the realisation of which is assumed to be in the interests of all. 105 The utopian not only fails to acknowledge the plurality of human goals, but in seeking to ‘mould’ 106 individuals to fit the shape of their vision, they also suppress difference, freedom and dissent 107 (Popper, 1957; Berlin, 2003). Berlin was wont to quote a line from Kant – ‘out of the crooked 108 timber of humanity no straight thing was ever made’ – to support his claim that the politics of 109 utopia ‘is likely to lead to suffering, disillusionment and failure’ (Berlin, 2003, p. 48). For Popper, 110 utopianism was considered pernicious and dangerous, leading inevitably to violence and tyranny 111 (Popper, 1963, pp. 358-361). 112 The liberal critique of utopianism is seldom questioned today. Utopia-as-system is almost 113 universally rejected, and few would suggest that utopia conceived as a totalising normative 114 prescriptive blueprint offers a fruitful and constructive guide for the contemporary educator. The 115 association between utopian blueprint and the totalitarian suppression of difference was hammered 116 home with great ideological force following the fall of actually existing socialism. As Singer noted 117 at the time, utopia became ‘a dirty word ... a nightmarish adjective soaked with all the blood of the 118 gulag’ (1993, p. 249). The debasement of utopia was made all the easier by the lack of any serious, 119 concerted attempt to challenge it (Elliott, 1993). 120 Assuming the role of ‘a kind of profoundly pessimistic self-flagellant chorus’, many on the 121 Left conceded the association between prescriptive utopian visions and totalitarian politics 122 (Thompson, 1991, p. 107). Some actively welcomed the demise of utopianism (Enzensberger, 123 1991), while those wanting to hold on to utopia as a concept sought to distance themselves from 124 totalising prescriptive visions (Therborn, 1991; Singer, 1993). Ideologically tarnished, utopia-as- 125 system became increasingly ostracised from radical discourse. Keen to free it of its pejorative 126 connotations, utopia was more and more presented as a flexible, provisional, open-ended process 127 (e.g. Sargisson, 1996). 128 Over recent years it has become possible to talk of the ‘rejuvenation’ of utopia (Hayden & el- 129 Ojeili, 2009). An engagement with utopianism is seen as necessary in order to challenge the 130 transformations associated with globalisation – globalised power relations, increasing polarisation 131 of wealth, cultural and military imperialism, and a growing sense of agentic impotence (Torres & 132 Teodoro, 2007; Hayden & el-Ojeili, 2009). Related to this is dissatisfaction with post-empiricist 133 deconstructive social science. Concerned primarily with dismantling and demystifying truth-claims 134 and value commitments, deconstructive social science – of the kind associated with the work of 135 Michel Foucault, for example – is seen to have generated an enfeebling ‘vocabulary of deficit’ 136 within which the concept of future possibilities is absent (Ludema et al, 1997). Deemed inadequate 137 in the face of the injustices of globalisation, what is called for instead is a socially enabling future- 138 oriented utopian ‘vocabulary of hope’. In the words of Tom Moylan, the dystopian realities of the 139 present demand as a response ‘a courageous embrace of the utopian project’ (2007, p. 215). 140 In the field of education, it is increasingly recognised that utopia offers a potentially energising 141 perspective (see Webb, 2009). Papastephanou even refers to ‘the educational comeback of utopia’ 142 (2008, p. 91). However, the identification of utopian systems with totalitarian politics is now as 143 much a part of the common sense of the radical pedagogue as it is the liberal ideologue. As a 144 consequence, the comeback of utopia has been a cautious one, accompanied everywhere by 145 warnings against ‘unrealistic’ visions and prescriptive ‘blueprints’ (Halpin, 2009). When Jacoby 146 highlights the significance of utopian thought, he does so as ‘a utopian who distrust[s] utopian 147 plans’ (2005, p. 97). Lewis argues for a utopian pedagogy of ‘radical uncertainty’ – a pedagogy that 148 is open, partial, provisional and takes us on ‘an educational quest for liberation without recourse to 282
Critical Pedagogy, Utopia and Political (Dis)Engagement 149 a set road’ (2010, pp. 209-210). In answer to the question ‘what is utopian pedagogy?’, Coté et al 150 answer that ‘we look to utopia not as a place we might reach but as an ongoing process of 151 becoming’ (2007, p. 13). For Giroux, the discourse of freedom, plurality and difference precludes 152 totalising visions and discredits utopian ‘blueprints’ and utopian ‘engineering’ (1997, pp. 191-196, 153 2003a, pp. 478-479). 154 While, therefore, it is right and important to highlight the recent ‘revitalisation’ of utopia as a 155 concept (Jameson, 2005, p. xii), it is also important to note that utopia-as-system has been 156 ‘abandoned’ in favour of utopia-as-process (Vieira, 2010, p. 22). The liberal critique of utopia-as- 157 system is accepted not only by postmodernist theory, but also by radical educators critical of the 158 kind of conservative liberalism offered by Berlin and Popper and hostile to contemporary neo- 159 liberalism. In one of the more extreme formulations, Hall distinguishes explicitly between ‘good’ 160 (open-ended process) utopianism and ‘bad’ (blueprint) utopianism, and argues that a future- 161 oriented pedagogy of hope needs to embrace the former while avoiding the latter (Hall, 2007). 162 Proponents of utopian pedagogy are keen to emphasise, however, that accepting the liberal 163 critique of utopian engineering does not mean accepting the liberal alternative – Popper’s 164 ‘piecemeal engineering’, or, as Berlin put it, lots of messy localised ad hoc ambiguous compromises 165 (Popper, 1957; Berlin, 2003). Rejecting utopia-as-system does not mean rejecting utopia full stop. 166 By embracing utopia-as-process, we are told, critical pedagogy can avoid, on the one hand, ‘the 167 indignity of speaking for others’ associated with messianic blueprint utopianism, and, on the other, 168 seeing the level of critical engagement reduced to nothing more than the kind of messy localised 169 compromises that leave power structures untroubled (Coté et al, 2007). What, then, does a critical 170 pedagogy underpinned by the concept of utopia-as-process look like? 171 Critical Pedagogy and Utopia-as-Process 172 I shall focus here on the work of Henry Giroux. Giroux is credited with ‘the first textbook use of 173 the term critical pedagogy’ in the early 1980s (Darder et al, 2003, p. 2), and for the past 30 years has 174 been consistently calling on educators to embrace the spirit of utopia. He characterises his own 175 critical pedagogy as a project striving to articulate ‘the language of hope and possibility’ (Giroux, 176 2011, p. 5), explicitly drawing inspiration from Ernst Bloch and his twin concepts of ‘educated hope’ 177 and ‘concrete utopia’ (Giroux, 2007). Like Bloch, Giroux interprets hope as a ‘longing’ born of the 178 sense that ‘something’s missing’ (Giroux, 2001, 2004). For both, this inchoate longing needs to be 179 transformed into a concrete ‘utopian longing’ (Giroux, 2003b, p. 158); hope needs to be educated so 180 that it is capable of reaching out towards concrete utopia. Giroux is at pains to point out that ‘the 181 language of possibility ... eschews the formulation of a grandiose blueprint for change’ (Giroux & 182 McLaren, 1991, p. 180). Utopian pedagogy rejects ‘a reified form of utopianism’ (Giroux, 1997, 183 p. 223). For Giroux, utopian thinking ‘is neither a blueprint for the future nor a form of social 184 engineering, but a belief that different futures are possible’ (Giroux, 2006, p. 55). 185 Education is presented as a public sphere that is currently atrophied but capable of 186 revitalisation. It is both a site of cultural reproduction and a ‘site of utopian possibility’ (Giroux, 187 2002, p. 96). The task of utopian pedagogy is to create citizens who understand the relationship 188 between power and knowledge, are capable of questioning the basic assumptions that govern 189 political life, recognise the limitations of contemporary institutions, possess the courage required to 190 take risks and challenge power, and are equipped with the skills and confidence needed to 191 transform existing social and political institutions rather than simply adapt to them (Giroux, 1997, 192 2002, 2006, 2011). Utopia is understood here as a collective human process. Human beings 193 animated by utopian thinking and educated hope refuse to accept the completeness of the present, 194 believe that different forms of human association are possible, possess a profound confidence in 195 their capacities as political agents, and strive to shape their own future. The role of education is to 196 provide the cognitive conditions – the knowledge, skills, capacities and experiences – that underpin 197 the utopian process. 198 Like all critical pedagogues, Giroux insists on the need to ground learning in the everyday 199 lives of students and to adopt ‘an approach that allows students to speak from their own histories 200 and collective memories’ (Giroux, 1997, pp. 157-158). Rather than glorifying the ‘student voice’, 201 however, utopian pedagogy seeks to problematise it. In order to explore the constraints and 283
Darren Webb 202 possibilities inherent in each concrete situation, student experiences are analysed and interrogated 203 in a way that is both critical and affirmative (Giroux & McLaren, 1991). This then provides a 204 platform for linking individual experiences with ‘a progressive sense of social destiny’ (Giroux, 205 2002, p. 102). Giroux talks of the need ‘to tap the hidden utopian desire’ located in the experiences, 206 discourses and relations within which students are embedded and of the need to ‘uncover the 207 submerged longings’ that can be found within all social and cultural practices (Giroux & McLaren, 208 1991, pp. 174, 178). The educator is thus engaged in a process of ‘excavating’ – by means of a 209 critical interrogation of the student voice – these hidden and submerged desires and longings 210 (Giroux & McLaren, 1991, p. 179). 211 What Giroux is trying to present here is a bottom-up process of utopian engagement. 212 Students’ lived experiences are used as a starting point for exploring the constraints and limitations 213 of the present, for highlighting its possibilities, and for grounding alternatives that are real and 214 concrete. Because the sense of utopian possibility is emergent rather than imposed, Giroux 215 dissociates himself from the ‘messianic’ tradition of blueprint utopianism (Giroux, 2004, p. 38). At 216 the same time, through their role as excavators, educationalists are responsible for nothing less 217 than ‘redirecting the paths of human desire’ (Giroux & McLaren, 1991, p. 180). In this notion of 218 ‘excavation’, Giroux’s debt to Bloch becomes evident. Bloch’s project – presented in his epic The 219 Principle of Hope, the text which largely defines the contemporary reading of utopia-as-process – 220 consisted of mining the depths of our cultural heritage in order to excavate those practices, 221 experiences and artefacts (in literature, art, music, architecture, film, dance) that contain utopian 222 dimensions that point to a better future and which can be used to guide, direct and educate our 223 present hopes. 224 However, the framework of educated hope developed by Bloch is not without its problems. 225 The crucial question is how one identifies the cultural ‘utopica’ UTOPIA? that can educate and 226 direct our hopes. For Giroux, the process of pedagogical excavation involves distinguishing 227 between those cultural practices that ‘open up’ human possibilities and those that ‘diminish’ them 228 (Giroux & Simon, 1992). But on what basis does one make this distinction? Bloch himself 229 encountered no problem at all in differentiating between concrete anticipations of human 230 flourishing and what he regarded as abstract dross. Jazz, for example, was dismissed as reactionary 231 ‘vomit’, while all things Baroque were heralded as signifiers of human authenticity (Bloch, 1986, 232 p. 394); Hollywood was ‘a poison factory’, while Russian folk dance said ‘Here I am human’ (Bloch, 233 1986, pp. 395, 410). Bloch was thus more than able to outline a utopian pedagogy; by holding up as 234 ‘guiding images’ all those cultural practices and artefacts that prefigure the realm of freedom, the 235 students’ hopes will become ‘educated’. They will gain a glimpse of what it is to be fully human, 236 will gain real insight into the possibilities of the present, and will consequently reach out to the 237 future and engage in the process of its becoming. 238 Bloch, however, possessed in his utopian armoury something that contemporary utopian 239 pedagogy lacks, namely, a confident willingness to make explicit prescriptive value judgements. It 240 is precisely such evaluative, prescriptive judgements that contemporary utopian pedagogy seeks to 241 avoid. For the utopian pedagogue, evaluation, specification and judgement are associated with ‘the 242 indignity of speaking for others’. Thus, Giroux criticises Bloch for his tendency to pre-specify the 243 content of utopia and seeks to utilise Bloch’s method while abandoning its evaluative content 244 (Giroux & McLaren, 1997, p. 156). Without such content, however, a concrete utopian approach to 245 education is unable to distinguish between practices that ‘open up’ and practices that ‘diminish’ 246 human possibility and is thus unable to provide a sense of direction. For Bloch, dreams are ‘easily 247 led astray, without contact with the real forward tendency into what is better’ (Bloch, 1986, 248 pp. 144-145). The project of educated hope becomes one of ‘teaching’ these dreams and of ‘keeping 249 them trained unerringly, usefully, on what is right’ (p. 3). Without an explicit, value-based sense of 250 ‘what is right’, the utopian educator’s capacity to teach, guide, direct and redirect is fatally 251 compromised. 252 In Picture Imperfect: utopian thought for an anti-utopian age, Russell Jacoby offers one of the most 253 sustained defences of utopia-as-process. Like many others, he accepts the liberal critique of utopia- 254 as-system, but argues that there is another tradition that offers utopian possibilities without the 255 totalising closure associated with utopian blueprints. What does utopia without a utopian vision 256 look like, he asks? An ‘imageless longing’ and a sense of hope, he answers (2005, p. 135). In a similar 257 vein, Coté et al (2007) present utopian pedagogy as a process of posing questions without the 284
Critical Pedagogy, Utopia and Political (Dis)Engagement 258 pretence of giving answers; an ‘objectless’ process of critical questioning; a process of creating 259 spaces of discourse, dialogue and debate. There are real problems here, however, as utopian 260 pedagogy is reduced to a method which takes the process of questioning, participation and dialogue 261 as an end in itself. Without a utopian vision from which to develop an educational project, utopia is 262 reduced to a series of specific, partial, and transient educational projects, and struggles to 263 distinguish itself from the kind of piecemeal ad hoc engineering advocated by Karl Popper and 264 Isaiah Berlin. A utopian pedagogue, such as Giroux, strives to direct and redirect the paths of 265 human desire, linking individual longings to a progressive sense of social destiny. He wants to 266 move beyond an endless, directionless romanticisation of the student voice. Without a vision, 267 however, directionless romanticism is all one is left with. 268 If, as critical pedagogy has always maintained, education is politics, then the political practice 269 of a pedagogy underpinned by utopia-as-process is an emaciated one. It is a pedagogy that valorises 270 an imageless longing; a pedagogy that fetishises spaces of discourse and processes of dialogue; a 271 pedagogy that resists normative judgement and refuses the task of constructing a political vision. It 272 is a pedagogy of the partial and the provisional; a pedagogy of the ad hoc and the piecemeal. It is 273 precisely the kind of ‘utopian pedagogy’ that, in posing no systemic threat to presently constituted 274 structures of power, would have left Popper and Berlin unruffled. While this seems to lead us to an 275 impasse – stuck between the dangers of oppressive totalising discourse on the one hand and 276 directionless romanticism on the other – the following section suggests that radical pedagogy has 277 too easily and too uncritically accepted the liberal rejection of ‘blueprint’ utopianism. 278 Critical Pedagogy and Utopia-as-System 279 Paulo Freire defines ‘utopia’ as ‘the dialectical process of denouncing and announcing – denouncing 280 the oppressing structure and announcing the humanizing structure’ (1976, p. 225). In stressing the 281 need for utopian annunciation, Freire argues that a ‘blueprint’ of the world in which we would like 282 to live is needed in order to ‘propel’ us along the path toward a better future (1996, p. 187). He 283 argues repeatedly that human beings are unfinished and that we are ontological wayfarers 284 travelling the path to ourselves. Rather than stopping there, however, with the notion of utopia as 285 an open-ended process of becoming, he argues that in order to travel the path to ourselves we need 286 a clear ‘design’ or ‘blueprint’ depicting the form and shape that a more fully human future will 287 take. Two reasons are given for this. The first is that, for Freire, human beings are purposive 288 creatures. Just as the artisan cannot operate with an open-ended, undecided, indeterminate 289 understanding of what they are about to execute, so too the human following their ontological 290 calling to become more fully themselves (Freire, 1994, p. 78). The second is that a substantive 291 utopian vision is required to counter the conservative drive to domesticate the future and render it 292 merely ‘a repetition of the present’ (Freire, 1972, p. 72). When so much ideological weight is placed 293 behind the proclamation that ‘there is no alternative’, utopian pedagogy needs to depict such an 294 alternative to rouse homo viator from a state of ontological paralysis. For Freire, liberatory 295 pedagogies ‘cannot exist without being driven by fundamental visions of a utopian society’ (Freire 296 & Rossatto, 2005, p. 17). The role of the educator becomes that of engaging the learner in their 297 curious, hopeful ontological journey by presenting to them a detailed vision of that towards which 298 they are striving. 299 Despite often drawing on the work of Freire, contemporary utopian pedagogy balks at the 300 prospect of presenting detailed utopian visions for fear of totalising closure, paternalistic elitism and 301 the indignity of speaking for others. This fear is misplaced, however. As Raymond Williams rightly 302 points out, by virtue of its very totalisation, the blueprint utopia ‘can envisage, in general structure 303 but also in detail, a different and practical way of life’ and ‘the value of the systematic utopia is to 304 lift our eyes beyond the short-term adjustments and changes which are the ordinary material of 305 politics’ (1983, p. 13). Unlike Berlin and Popper, Williams had taken the time to familiarise himself 306 with the genre of utopian literature and was more than aware that the normative prescriptive 307 depictions of a better way of being did not, as a whole, present visions of a uniform repressive hell. 308 In the best examples of the genre, Williams argues, ‘there is evidence both of deliberate and 309 sustained thought about possible futures and then, probably preceding and succeeding this, the 310 discovery of a structure of feeling which, within the parameters of that thought, is in its turn a form 285
Darren Webb 311 of recognition’ (Williams, 1991, p. 266). A newly discovered structure of feeling, experienced as a 312 form of recognition, is precisely what the holistic utopia can offer. And it is this dual process of 313 discovery and recognition that enables the utopia to produce its most potent pedagogical effects: 314 those of defamiliarising the familiar, familiarising the strange, liberating the imagination from the 315 constraints of common sense, throwing up new solutions to pressing contemporary problems, 316 generating new patterns of desire, and catalysing change. 317 As far as Freire himself was concerned, rather than signalling a descent into messianism, the 318 pedagogical value of utopian visions is that they help create the conditions through which learners 319 themselves emerge as dreamers of utopia. This was recognised long ago by William Morris. In 320 News from Nowhere Morris offers us one of the great utopian systems – a vision of society 321 reconstituted in its totality and a vision full of detailed and normative content. Yet Morris himself 322 was critical of utopian ‘prophets’ and fully maintained that the humanised future would be shaped 323 by those who live in it (Morris, 1973, pp. 106-107, 188-189). Morris’ project is commonly referred to 324 now as ‘the education of desire’, while Freire described his own as ‘a pedagogy of desire’ and ‘the 325 education of longing’ (2007a, p. 5, 2007b, p. 25). For Morris, the crucial role of utopian visions in 326 the education of desire was that ‘these dreams for the future, make many man a socialist whom 327 sober reason deduced from science and political economy ... would not move at all’ (Morris, 1973, 328 p. 189). Like Morris, Freire believed that the key task of the educator is to generate political dreams, 329 political yearnings, and political desires. And like Morris, Freire believed that utopian visions were 330 needed to guide purposive creatures – moved more by annunciations of the future goal than by 331 denunciations of the dehumanising present – along their ontological journey toward a more fully 332 human future. Utopian visions liberate the imagination as to the possibilities for change and help to 333 both generate and shape dreams, yearnings and desires. 334 Freire was keen to point out here that: ‘What is implied is not the transmission to the people 335 of a knowledge previously elaborated, a process that ignores what they already know, but the act 336 of returning to them, in an organized form, what they themselves offered in a disorganized form’ 337 (1978, pp. 24-25). This key point is phrased differently at different times – teaching better what the 338 people already know or transforming knowledge based on feelings into knowledge based on critical 339 understanding (1994, p. 273). With regards to the design for a new way of being that illuminates the 340 path toward a better future, this, for Freire, emerges from the learners’ reality in confused form and 341 at the affective level. The role of the educator is to work with learners to provide the design with a 342 deeper cognitive foundation and a sharper, more precise shape. 343 Borrowing a concept from Karl Mannheim, it is possible to interpret Freirean pedagogy as ‘an 344 active utopia’. According to Mannheim, ‘it is a very essential feature of modern history that in the 345 gradual organization for collective action social classes become effective in transforming historical 346 reality only when their aspirations are embodied in utopias appropriate to the changing situation’ 347 (1940, p. 187). The role of the educator is crucial here in giving clear utopian form to popular 348 aspirations. For Mannheim, the utopian conceptions of the educator seize on currents present in 349 society, give expression to them, flow back into the outlook of a social group and are translated by 350 this group into action. Rather than corresponding directly to a concrete body of articulated needs, 351 the active utopia ‘transmits’ and ‘articulates’ the amorphous ‘collective impulse’ of a group 352 (pp. 185-186). While Freire’s utopian pedagogy starts from and is grounded in the experiences of 353 the students, seizing and reflecting their ‘collective impulse’, it is also an active and constructive 354 pedagogy giving positive utopian expression – positive annunciation – to this collective impulse. 355 Conclusion 356 Critical utopian pedagogy is a pedagogy of resistance and a pedagogy of possibility. Confronting a 357 world of inequality, deficiency and unfulfilment, utopian pedagogy rejects utopian blueprints while 358 working with students to excavate utopian ‘traces’ that can guide us on towards what might be and 359 what is not yet (Greene, 2003). Conceptualising utopia as an open-ended process of becoming, 360 utopian pedagogy strives to reconfigure relations of power and to create counter-hegemonic spaces 361 of possibility. Utopian pedagogy seeks to resist the closure of critical space within the education 362 system, while also striving to develop a vocabulary of hope to guide a transformative response to 363 globalisation. 286
Critical Pedagogy, Utopia and Political (Dis)Engagement 364 What I have tried to argue in this article is that utopian pedagogy as currently understood is 365 not up to the task. The emphasis on creating spaces of dialogue and points of departure misses the 366 point that dialogue ‘is not a “free space” where you say what you want. Dialogue takes place inside 367 some program and content’ (Freire & Shor, 1987, p. 102). Without content and vision utopian 368 spaces run the risk of remaining empty and barren. As Harvey eloquently argues, utopia conceived 369 as process has ‘the habit of getting lost in the romanticism of endlessly open projects that never 370 have to come to a point of closure’. Without closure in the form of a vision and a goal, utopia 371 remains ‘a pure signifier of hope destined never to acquire a material referent’ (Harvey, 2000, 372 pp. 189, 174). In one of the rare contemporary defences of ‘utopian models’, Olssen argues that the 373 retreat from totalising visions presages a retreat of the imagination from the terrain of social life, 374 the end result of which is ‘political paralysis’ (Olssen, 2006, p. 116). 375 In defending utopia-as-system, the article has not sought to reproduce the binary separation 376 between it and utopia-as-process. This is not a question of either/or. The aim of the article has 377 rather been to bring utopian system/programme/content back into discussions concerning the 378 theory and practice of critical pedagogy. The rejection of utopian blueprints by radical educators 379 has been too severe, too absolute. The practice of depicting holistic normative visions is too often 380 dismissed out of hand as being ‘dystopian’, with Popper still being cited as the reference point for 381 such an evaluation (Halpin, 2009). We are still living in the shadow of the enfeebled retreat from 382 utopia – and the construction of a false binary – that followed in the wake of 1989. The uncritical 383 acceptance of the liberal critique has paved the way for the domestication and ideological 384 recuperation of the concept of utopia. The idea of presenting a detailed normative picture of an 385 alternative state or society is so far removed from contemporary common sense that the boundaries 386 of the utopian have increasingly become confined to the here and now. One group of educators, 387 for example, claim without any sense of paradox to be working towards ‘a vision of utopia which 388 has the possibility of achievement in present socio-economic conditions’ (Sawyer et al, 2007, p. 228). 389 Interestingly, in his very first book, Giroux challenges such a reading of utopia. For Giroux, 390 ‘radical pedagogy needs a vision – one that celebrates not what is but what could be, that looks 391 beyond the immediate to the future and links struggle to a new set of human possibilities’ (1983, 392 p. 242). He goes on, too, to criticise those who fetishise pedagogical process, arguing that: ‘A 393 pedagogy that simply promotes a culture of questioning says nothing about what kind of future is 394 or should be implied by how and what educators teach’ (2003a, p. 482). Although a passionate and 395 persistent critic of utopia-as-system, he concedes that ‘without a vision for the future – without 396 asking “Empowerment for what?” – critical pedagogy becomes reduced to a method for 397 participation that takes democracy as an end, not a means’ (Giroux & McLaren, 1991, p. 158). 398 However, Giroux’s uncritical acceptance of the liberal critique of utopian blueprints prevents him 399 from presenting the kind of normative vision of a better world that he (sometimes at least) 400 acknowledges to be necessary. 401 Without a vision, utopian pedagogy runs the risk of becoming an empty and endless project 402 that romanticises the process while losing sight of the goal. Utopian pedagogy cannot, therefore, 403 confine itself to creating spaces of critical dialogue and communities of learning. Nor is it enough to 404 interrogate the student voice in order to uncover submerged longings and desires. As Mannheim 405 rightly highlighted, unless the longings, desires and ‘collective impulse’ of a group are seized upon 406 and articulated as a utopian system by the visionary educator, then this collective impulse remains 407 just an impulse – an objectless process – because it lacks the ‘situationally transcendent ideas’ that 408 alone can guide and direct transformative action (1940, p. 185). Without a positively annunciated 409 utopian goal to motivate and guide the praxis of purposive human actors, social hope will take the 410 form of a directionless passionate longing and the process utopianism that emerges from and feeds 411 back into this hope will run the risk of getting lost in the romanticism of endlessly open projects. 412 The strong utopian thrust of Freirean pedagogy has been tamed and domesticated over 413 recent years. Freire is presented as an educator who rejects utopia-as-system and proposes instead a 414 utopian practice and a utopian politics that is provisional, open-ended and indeterminate (Giroux & 415 McLaren, 1997; Lewis, 2010). He is thus positioned comfortably within the contemporary move 416 towards a ‘pragmatic utopianism’ (Vieira, 2010, p. 22) – a future-oriented critical thinking which 417 refuses to focus on a utopian goal and abandons the quest for systemic transformation. Power has 418 little to fear from utopia so understood. Mainstream Christian philosophy, for example, stands at 419 odds with ‘descriptively full’ normative utopian systems, but is perfectly at ease with ‘the idea of a 287
Darren Webb 420 changing progressive and processive developing utopia’ (Sutherland, 1989, p. 204). So too, 421 conservative voices, such as Berlin and Popper, erstwhile critics who would find little to object to 422 in the ideologically recuperated reading of utopia as a piecemeal pragmatic process. 423 Freire, however, always insisted on the need for utopian annunciation. It was annunciation, 424 indeed, that gave utopia its force. Philip Wegner (2002) suggests that utopia performs two 425 pedagogical operations – deterritorialisation (the critical dismantling of existing social norms and 426 institutions) and reterritorialisation (the construction of new forms and institutions through a 427 pedagogy of desire and the education of longing). For Freire, deterritorialisation alone was 428 insufficient. What defined a utopian pedagogy, and differentiated it from mere critical pedagogy, 429 was the act of annunciating a new reality (Webb, 2012). For Freire, only a utopian pedagogy of 430 annunciation could effectively counter what Žižek (2009) and Badiou (2010) describe as the 431 ideology of late modernity – the resigned acceptance that there is no alternative, that everything 432 has been worked out, that the future will be a mere repetition of the present. Indeed, ‘the struggle 433 for the restoration of utopia’ is presented as the key animating imperative of political and 434 educational practice (Freire, 1998, p. 103). The role of the active utopian educator becomes one of 435 unmasking reality, of radicalising hope, of illuminating the path toward a better future and, 436 crucially, of directing purposive action towards the realisation of a utopian vision, system and goal. 437 References 438 Badiou, A. (2010) The Communist Hypothesis. London: Verso. 439 Berlin, I. (2003) The Crooked Timber of Humanity. London: Pimlico. 440 Bloch, E. (1986) The Principle of Hope, 3 vols. Oxford: Blackwell. 441 Carlson, D. (1996) Teachers as Political Actors: from reproductive theory to the crisis of schooling, in 442 P. Leistyna, A. Woodrum & S. Sherblom (Eds) Breaking Free: the transformative power of critical pedagogy. 443 Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Review. 444 Coté, M., Day, R. & de Peuter, G. (2007) Introduction: what is utopian pedagogy?, in M. Coté, R. Day & 445 G. de Peuter (Eds) Utopian Pedagogy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 446 Darder, A., Baltodano, M. & Torres, R. (2003) Critical Pedagogy: an introduction, in A. Darder, M. Baltodano 447 & R. Torres (Eds) The Critical Pedagogy Reader. London: RoutledgeFalmer. 448 Elliott, G. (1993) The Cards of Confusion: reflections on historical communism and the ‘end of history’, 449 Radical Philosophy, 64, 3-12. 450 Enzensberger, H.M. (1991) Ways of Walking: postscript to utopia, in R. Blackburn (Ed.) After the Fall: the 451 failure of communism and the future of socialism. London: Verso. 452 Freire, P. (1972) Cultural Action for Freedom. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 453 Freire, P. (1976) A Few Notes about the Word ‘Conscientization’, in R. Dale, G. Esland & M. MacDonald 454 (Eds) Schooling and Capitalism. London: Routledge. 455 Freire, P. (1978) Pedagogy in Process. London: Writers and Readers Publishing Cooperative SHOULD THIS 456 BE ‘SEABURY PRESS’?. 457 Freire, P. (1994) Pedagogy of Hope. London: Continuum. 458 Freire, P. (1996) Letters to Cristina. New York: Routledge. 459 Freire, P. (1998) Pedagogy of Freedom. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 460 Freire, P. (2007a) Daring to Dream. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 461 Freire, P. (2007b) Pedagogy of the Heart. New York: Continuum. 462 Freire, P. & Rossatto, C. (2005) An Interview with Paulo Freire, in C. Rassatto Engaging Paulo Freire’s Pedagogy 463 of Possibility. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 464 Freire, P. & Shor, I. (1987) A Pedagogy for Liberation. Basingstoke: Macmillan. 465 Giroux, H. (1983) Theory and Resistance in Education. London: Heinemann. 466 Giroux, H. (1986) Solidarity, Struggle, and the Public Sphere: beyond the politics of antiutopianism in radical 467 education, The Review of Education, 12(3), 165-173. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0098559860120302 NOT 468 CITED – PLEASE CITE OR DELETE 469 Giroux, H. (1997) Pedagogy and the Politics of Hope. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 470 Giroux, H. (2001) ‘Something’s Missing’: cultural studies, neoliberalism, and the politics of educated hope, 471 Strategies, 14(2), 227-252. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10402130120088785 288
Critical Pedagogy, Utopia and Political (Dis)Engagement 472 Giroux, H. (2002) Educated Hope in an Age of Privatized Visions, Cultural Studies<=>Critical Methodologies, 473 2(1), 93-112. 474 Giroux, H (2003a) Dystopian Nightmares and Educated Hopes: the return of the pedagogical and the 475 promise of democracy, Policy Futures in Education, 1(3), 467-487. 476 http://dx.doi.org/10.2304/pfie.2003.1.3.3 477 Giroux, H. (2003b) Youth, Higher Education, and the Crisis of Public Time: educated hope and the possibility 478 of a democratic future, Social Identities, 9(2), 141-168. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1350463032000101533 479 Giroux, H. (2004) When Hope is Subversive, Tikkun, 19(6), 38-39. 480 Giroux, H. (2006) Dystopian Nightmares and Educated Hopes: the return of the pedagogical and the promise 481 of democracy, in M. Peters & J. Freeman-Moir (Eds) Edutopias: new utopian thinking in education. 482 Rotterdam: Sense. 483 Giroux, H. (2007) Utopian Thinking in Dangerous Times: critical pedagogy and the project of educated hope, 484 in M. Coté, R. Day & G. de Peuter (Eds) Utopian Pedagogy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 485 Giroux, H. (2011) On Critical Pedagogy. London: Continuum. 486 Giroux, H. & McLaren, P. (1991) Radical Pedagogy as Cultural Politics: beyond the discourse of critique and 487 anti-utopianism, in D. Morton & M. Zavarzadeh (Eds) Theory/Pedagogy/Politics. Chicago: University of 488 Illinois Press. 489 Giroux, H. & McLaren, P. (1997) Paulo Freire, Postmodernism, and the Utopian Imagination: a Blochean 490 reading, in J. Daniel & T. Moylan (Eds) Not Yet: reconsidering Ernst Bloch. London: Verso. 491 Giroux, H. & Simon, R. (1992) Schooling, Popular Culture, and a Pedagogy of Possibility, in K. Weiler & 492 C. Mitchell (Eds) What Schools Can Do. New York: SUNY Press. 493 Greene, M. (2003) In Search of Critical Pedagogy, in A. Darder, M. Baltodano & R. Torres (Eds) The Critical 494 Pedagogy Reader. London: RoutledgeFalmer. 495 Hall, S. (2007) Universities, Intellectuals, and Multitudes, in M. Coté, R. Day & G. de Peuter (Eds) Utopian 496 Pedagogy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 497 Halpin, D. (2009) Utopian Totalism versus Utopian Realism, Oxford Review of Education, 35(6), 761-764. 498 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03054980903399295 499 Harvey, D. (2000) Spaces of Hope. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 500 Hayden, P. & el-Ojeili, C. (2009) Reflections on the Demise and Renewal of Utopia in a Global Age, in 501 P. Hayden & C. el-Ojelli (Eds) Globalization and Utopia: critical essays. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 502 http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/9780230233607 503 Jacoby, R. (2005) Picture Imperfect: utopian thought for an anti-utopian age. New York: Columbia University 504 Press. 505 Jameson, F. (2005) Archaeologies of the Future: the desire called utopia and other science fictions. London: Verso. 506 Levitas, R. (2007) The Imaginary Reconstitution of Society: utopia as method, in T. Moylan & R. Baccolini 507 (Eds) Utopia Method Vision. Oxford: Peter Lang. 508 Lewis, T. (2010) Messianic Pedagogy, Educational Theory, 60(2), 231-248. 509 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-5446.2010.00355.x 510 Ludema, J., Wilmot, T. & Srivastva, S. (1997) Organizational Hope: reaffirming the constructive task of social 511 and organizational inquiry, Human Relations, 50, 1015-1052. 512 http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/001872679705000809 513 McLaren, P. & Tadeu da Silva, T. (1993) Decentring Pedagogy: critical literacy, resistance and the politics of 514 memory, in P. McLaren & P. Leonard (Eds) Paulo Freire: a critical encounter. London: Routledge. 515 http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780203420263 516 Mannheim, K. (1940) Ideology and Utopia. London: Kegan Paul. 517 McKenna, E. (2001) The Task of Utopia. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 518 Morris, W. (1973) Political Writings of William Morris. London: Lawrence & Wishart. 519 Moylan, T. (2007) Realizing Better Futures: strong thought for hard times, in T. Moylan & R. Baccolini (Eds) 520 Utopia Method Vision. Oxford: Peter Lang. 521 Olssen, M. (2006) Totalitarianism and the ‘Repressed’ Utopia of the Present: moving beyond Hayek, Popper 522 and Foucault, in M. Peters & J. Freeman-Moir (Eds) Edutopias: new utopian thinking in education. 523 Rotterdam: Sense. 524 Papastephanou, M. (2008) Dystopian Reality, Utopian Thought and Educational Practice, Studies in the 525 Philosophy of Education, 27(2-3), 89-102. 289
Darren Webb 526 Popper, K. (1957) The Poverty of Historicism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 527 Popper, K. (1963) Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 528 Richard, R. (1995) Truth and Progress: philosophical papers III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. NOT 529 CITED IN THE ARTICLE – PLEASE CITE OR DELETE 530 Roemer, K. (2003) Utopian Audiences: how readers locate nowhere. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts 531 Press. 532 Sargent, L. (1975) Utopia – the problem of definition, Extrapolation, 16(2), 137-148. 533 Sargent, L. (1994) The Three Faces of Utopianism Revisited, Utopian Studies, 5(1), 1-36. 534 Sargent, L. (2010) Utopianism: a very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 535 Sargisson, L. (1996) Contemporary Feminist Utopianism. London: Routledge. 536 Sawyer, W., Singh, M., Woodrow, C., Downes, T., Johnston, C. & Whitton, D. (2007) Robust Hope and 537 Teacher Education Policy, Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 35(3), 227-242. 538 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13598660701447197 539 Singer, D. (1993) In Defense of Utopia, The Socialist Register, 29, 249-256. 540 Sutherland, S. (1989) Hope, in G. Vesey (Ed.) The Philosophy of Christianity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 541 Press. 542 Therborn, G. (1991) Vorsprung durch Rethink, in R. Blackburn (Ed.) After the Fall: the failure of communism and 543 the future of socialism. London: Verso. 544 Thompson, E.P. (1991) The Ends of Cold War: a rejoinder, in R. Blackburn (Ed.) After the Fall: the failure of 545 communism and the future of socialism. London: Verso. 546 Torres, C. & Teodoro, A. (Eds) (2007) Critique and Utopia: new developments in the sociology of education. 547 Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 548 Vieira, F. (2010) The Concept of Utopia, in G. Claeys (Ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Utopian Literature. 549 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CCOL9780521886659.001 550 Webb, D. (2009) Where’s the Vision? The Concept of Utopia in Contemporary Educational Theory, Oxford 551 Review of Education, 35(6), 743-760. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03054980903371179 552 Webb, D. (2012) Process, Orientation and System: the pedagogical operation of utopia in the work of Paulo 553 Freire, Educational Theory, 62(5), 593-608. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-5446.2012.00463.x 554 Wegner, P. (2002) Imaginary Communities: utopia, the nation, and the spatial histories of modernity. Berkeley, CA: 555 University of California Press. 556 Williams, R. (1983) Towards 2000. London: Chatto & Windus. 557 Williams, R. (1991) Writing in Society. London: Verso. 558 Zaslove, J. (2007) Exiled Pedagogy: from the ‘guerrilla’ classroom to the university of excess, in M. Coté, 559 R. Day & G. de Peuter (Eds) Utopian Pedagogy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 560 Žižek, S. (2009) How to Begin from the Beginning, New Left Review, 57, 43-56. 561 562 563 564 DARREN WEBB is currently Senior Lecturer within the School of Education, University of 565 Sheffield, United Kingdom. He is Programme Director of the BA Education, Culture and 566 Childhood and teaches modules in education policy and the sociology of education. His research 567 interests are centred around the relationship between hope, education and power. He is currently 568 leading a project exploring the construction of hope in educational sites and settings. 569 Correspondence: d.webb@sheffield.ac.uk 290